: Thank you to our sponsors.
Platinum Sponsor: Gravity Forms.
Build accessible, powerful
WordPress forms with Gravity Forms.
Flexible tools for creators,
developers, and teams of all sizes.
Platinum Sponsor: WP Engine.
WP Engine provides
the most relied upon
and trusted WordPress products
for businesses, brands,
and agencies of all sizes.
Platinum Sponsor: Woo.
WooCommerce is the open-source
e-commerce platform built on WordPress,
helping merchants worldwide
sell, manage, and grow their businesses.
Gold Sponsors: Ally Web Accessibility,
Equalize Digital: websites for everyone,
GoDaddy,
GreenGeeks Web Hosting,
Yoast.
Silver Sponsors: AAArdvark,
CodeGeek –
Your Vision, Our Talent, One Team,
Kinetic Iris,
Kinsta,
Pressable,
Second Melody.
Bronze Sponsors:
9 Planets Hosting,
Engage,
Draw Attention,
Multidots,
NerdPress,
Osom Studio,
OZeWAI –
Australian Web Accessibility Initiative,
Progress Planner,
QualityLogic,
Sharp,
Simply Schedule Appointments,
SiteGround,
StellarWP,
Termageddon,
WebYes.
: Welcome to
WordPress Accessibility Day 2025.
My name is Chris Hinds,
and I'm the COO at Equalize Digital.
Thank you for joining us for "Built
the Website with AI, but is it Accessible?"
with Janaki Konar and Fahad Lambate.
Janaki is an IAAP-certified
web accessibility specialist
and the accessibility testing QA lead
at BarrierBreak.
She channels nine plus years
of accessibility experience
into breaking down barriers
and serving as a mentor
to numerous colleagues.
Fahad is an IAAP-certified
professional in web accessibility,
and the associate accessibility director
at BarrierBreak.
He spearheads the company's
strategic initiatives
that make the digital world
more inclusive.
Please feel free to add your questions
in the Zoom Q&A section,
and we'll answer them
at the end of the session.
Use the chat
to connect with other attendees.
: Thank you.
Greetings to everyone
listening to this talk.
Today, Fahad and I are going to talk
about "Built the Website with an AI,
but is it Accessible?
Exploring Accessibility
of AI-Generated Websites."
Before diving into this topic,
we'd like to give a gist of
the organization we come from,
BarrierBreak.
At BarrierBreak, we focus on
remediation and auditing of websites,
applications, documents,
authoring a VPAT,
performing design review,
and creating playbooks,
along with products
such as A11yInspect,
A11yNow,
and ACE Learning.
Let's focus on today's agenda
for our talk.
Today, we are going to look into
what exactly is digital accessibility
and why it is important.
Creating a website
with an AI and its benefits.
We have identified
three different zones.
Those are green, red, and yellow.
We will explore in detail
about these zones during our talk.
We will see how to inspect, test,
and fix accessibility issues,
along with a demo showing
how AllyInspect needs to be used
to check for accessibility bugs
on any webpage.
Finally,
we will be sharing our conclusions.
Let's start by understanding
what digital accessibility is.
Accessibility means
creating a digital content, website,
applications, document, tools, systems,
usable and understandable by everyone,
including people with disability.
Creating a document
or creating a digital content accessible
need to make sure that
it is going to be inclusive
and usable by everyone.
Making a content digital
does not limit only
by focusing on people
with permanent disability,
but it should also help people
with situational disability.
It should enhance
the overall user experience.
For instance,
we would have seen people
using a dark mode on their devices.
Sometimes it is about preference,
but sometimes it is about need.
For example,
people using a device in a dark mode
wherein they are
in a low-light condition.
Now, a dark mode becomes a necessity.
It helps in reducing the eye strain,
and it also help by providing
a good readable view for the user.
To take another example,
we might have experienced a situation
wherein we have to complete a task
or maybe call an urgent person
for some reason,
and in this situation, we would not have
our glasses handy with us.
In this situation,
features like text-to-speech
or a screen magnifier comes handy.
It helps us in completing the task
and making that urgent phone call.
Now, the next question is why?
Why create all digital content accessible?
The main goal for creating
any digital content accessible
is to make sure everyone can use it,
everyone can interact
with the product,
and obviously, allowing
everyone to participate equally.
Also, in some region,
there are legal requirements.
The digital product
must meet to specifically adhere
to some accessibility standards.
Now, apart from legal compliances,
making a digital content accessible also
comes in place to improve the brand value,
and it's also provide more values
in terms of business.
For example,
it boosts the brand reputation
by showing it it is inclusive,
it is based on users' need,
and also it improves audience reach.
It creates a customer base.
Apart from all these benefits,
like enhancing SEOs,
creating a content accessible
is the right thing to do
as it makes sure that
the product is usable by everyone
in different conditions
or situations.
Nowadays, we have seen a rise,
a major rise when it comes to
creating a web page
or building a website
with the help of AI.
AI is not limited only
by generating content,
but nowadays, it's very much in use
in different stages
of website development.
It can provide visuals,
like it can create icons,
it can create images.
It can provide suggestion
in terms of layouts, color schemes.
It writes code in HTML and CSS.
All this can be just done
with the help of a simple
plain language prompt
by a user.
It can also create a full-page content,
and again, just by a simple prompt.
Such kind of AI tool simplifies
the work of a developer and a designer,
but with that, it also opens the door
for a non-technical user.
Now, someone who is not well-versed
with development and designing,
but can yet create a functional
and a well-structured website.
Such kind of AI feature
helps especially small business
and individuals
who may not have a budget
or a resource to hire a full team.
With AI, they can yet create
an online presence
independently and efficiently.
An example of a WordPress itself
has an AI assistant
which can be used
within the dashboard of WordPress.
It gives different suggestions
to select layouts,
to select color schemes,
textiles.
It helps in giving suggestions
of adding different images.
It can customize content,
sections, headlines, images.
It can rewrite a content
based on different audience.
In using a WordPress AI,
we can give a prompt.
It will build
an entire web page for us,
and even after that,
if you want to make any edits
or maybe add any content,
remove any content
or change something,
yet can be done manually
as well as with an AI prompt.
This is beneficial
for freelancing agencies.
It becomes easier
for their project turnaround time
because using an AI is faster
and it is easier,
and it is more adaptable
when it comes to dynamic changes.
AI especially helps people
who often struggle on understanding
where to start in terms of content
or in terms of understanding
the page structure or the layouts.
AI becomes a starting point.
AI nowadays has turned
into a built-in guide
in helping user to start with.
AI is beneficial when it comes to
including the AI features
from the very beginning of the product
project stage.
There are more such AI website builders,
for example, Shopify, Wix, Squarespace,
Hostinger, and there are many more.
Having said that,
AI definitely helps in generating
or creating a process or a project,
but it does not guarantee
that the webpage that the AI has created
comes with 100% accessibility.
There where we have identified few zones,
and to talk more further about the zones,
I will hand it over to Fahad.
: Thanks, Janaki,
for sharing that information
about accessibility
and also with regards to
what are the different tools
that are available
to make a webpage using AI.
Coming to the accessibility lens,
which is about what AI is doing right
when it comes to creating a webpage.
The first thing is about landmarks.
A landmark is
a basic structure of the webpage
which needs to be done
right for various reasons,
especially for a screen-reading user
to understand
which part of the webpage
they are in.
Are they in header,
in the main content, or the footer?
This is something
which has been done right.
We have used,
for this particular session,
the examples by creating a webpage
through AI WordPress builder,
and all of the examples
are coming to that.
The first thing is about landmarks,
and they have done it
right by using the header,
main, and footer tag in the right places,
which is a good thing.
Apart from that,
when it comes to skip links,
even that is done right,
which is again a basic requirement
when it comes to accessibility,
though it might be debatable,
not all webpages need a skip link
and all those things,
and not always it is required,
but I'll say it definitely improves
the usability of the webpage as well,
especially when most
of the sites nowadays
have a repetitive content
in the header section.
That skip to content
is really good to have
and in certain cases
must have on the page.
In this case, they have done it right
by adding it in the code,
which is available as soon as
the user focuses the skip link
using the keyboard,
and on activating the skip link,
the focus goes to the main page,
the main content of the page.
This is something
which is done right.
Simple expand/collapse controls.
Here I'll just give a disclaimer
because not every time this work,
but when it worked, it worked well.
I'll give you both the examples.
The first thing what worked well is
when we were trying to give prompts
to create a hamburger menu.
It created a simple hamburger menu,
a button which is opening
or collapsing the menu
when the viewport is smaller.
This particular button had a good label,
which said,
"Open menu and close menu,"
depending on what state
that menu was.
Also, a native button element was used.
In addition to that,
whatever was expanding on this menu,
it was also keeping the focus
within that menu and the button itself,
and not going in the background content,
which was again good addition.
In certain cases,
when we tried to create
an expand/collapse for the control,
which is more of an accordion.
Over there, the AI struggled
because many times with certain prompts
or with additional prompts also,
that accordion was unable
to be accessible using the keyboard
because it was not giving
the keyboard support to it.
It was just giving
a plain structure to it,
like visually it might just appear
that it is an accordion,
but there was no interactiveness
to that particular element.
In this particular case,
even after additional prompt,
the AI was unable to improve it.
The color contrast,
I'll say this is the most constant thing
which was done right
when it comes to building
a website using an AI,
because it is also depending on
what theme you choose.
If you prompt for accessible color theme
for the webpage,
it will give you
a good options of colors
which will help to give
a good contrast to your webpage.
In this case,
we chose a simple contrast,
which is a mixture of
white, black, orange,
and so on colors.
In this screenshot,
there is a "join now' button,
which is having an orange background
and a black text.
Similarly, other content
on the webpage mostly is in
black background
with white text or vice versa.
It is having a contrast ratio
in this case,
the white and black as 21:1,
which is more than enough to meet
the color contrast requirement.
When it comes to form,
so form was also
having few good things about it
because when it comes
to the programmatically defined labels,
those were done right.
It was done using the basic method,
and it was good to see not overuse
of ARIA was there over here
because using a label
and for ID association
with the input tag,
it was done right to provide a solution
between the label and the field.
Similarly, mandatory fields
were done also right.
Whichever fields are mandatory,
we're having a required keyword
in the label.
When it comes to the input
that was used or any form control
that was used,
it was having required=true
and ARIA-required=true as well.
I know maybe both
are not necessarily needed,
but it was a good addition.
For screen reader user,
it will be important
that if they miss reading
required keyword for some reason,
at least it will have ARIA-required=true,
which will make them understand
if it's a requirment.
Another thing about the form
was the programmatically
defined label error messages.
The error messages
that was used in this case,
there is screenshot,
which is having the form
with name, email,
and message field,
email being the required field,
and it is having an inline error message
for this email field.
There is also a standard error message,
which is there
towards the end of the form,
just before the send button,
"Please fill out the form correctly."
Obviously, that is debatable
because the location
of that standard text is not right
because it should ideally be
at the top of the form.
At the same time,
the inline error message
was done right at least.
It was having also
an ARIA-invalid=true attribute
for the field, which was an error,
and it was good to see that.
Plus the focus was going
to the field with error,
the first field with error.
That was also a good addition to it,
such that user
don't have to forcefully go back
and they can be automatically taken
to that.
Also, they have used
ARIA error message attribute
on this field,
which was, again,
not necessarily completely robust,
but they have at least tried to use it
and pass on the ID of the field,
which is all the error message text
that is there.
Due to that,
it was accessible as well.
Coming to the basic requirement
of the structure is again a list.
This was also done pretty well
across most of the page content.
In this case,
there is an example of a FIGURE section
which is having navigation links,
which are related to each other,
and a set of social media links.
They both were separately coded
as a list structure,
and appropriately, the UL, LI
was used to code this.
Now, since we have seen some
of the accessibility events,
there could be obviously
accessibility misses by AI,
and that is bound to happen
when it comes to AI.
I would want to say is,
accessibility is not something
like a checkbox,
like, "if you give a prompt
that make an accessible web page
or make an accessible component,
it will give you directly the result."
You have to give specific prompts,
and in certain cases,
those prompts might not even guarantee
the accessibility of the event.
You have to actually understand
that it's accessible by trying it out,
by testing the page,
understanding if it's accessible or not,
the component that has been created.
It's really a hit
and miss in a lot of places.
The one example
which I told about the accordion,
so that was really
the most important one,
because if you're creating
an accessible accordion,
asking such prompts to the AI,
it should ideally give you such output,
which was not the case.
I'm sure there would be
other components as well,
which will have such problems too.
When you're trying to build
an accessible page,
it won't have accessibility
by default.
Whatever content you're using on the page,
what is the purpose of that content?
It really depends
what all needs to be accessible
in such cases.
Now, let's have a look
at some of the common examples
when the AI was not giving
the right output
when trying to use even
as much as accurate prompts possible.
The first thing was
about color contrast.
I know I told about the color contrast
being commonly done right,
but there were also instances
where the color contrast
was not done right,
if you choose the wrong theme,
or even in certain cases,
it might say it's accessible.
Maybe the text which is used
and the background color might be
accessible in most of the places,
but definitely in certain scenarios,
it will fail.
Here, this example is
about an error message text
wherein the red color error message text
is failing the contrast ratio requirement
against the background color,
as it's coming to around 1.86:1.
Non-meaningful links.
What is happening over here
is there are multiple same type of links
that is present.
This will definitely happen
if you're trying to create a blog website
or wherein there will be multiple articles
or maybe even product websites,
wherein there will be
multiple products,
and you want to redirect
to a certain page.
In such cases,
what you will also see is
this is not having a meaningful text.
It is just saying "join now."
There is no additional context to it.
There is one more issue over here.
We'll talk about this
in the later part.
We'll come to that as well.
I'm sure everyone might be thinking,
"Hey, that is not an issue."
I'll come to that.
Also, when it comes to
the heading hierarchy mistakes,
that is also bound to happen with AI.
What we have seen is
when it comes to the creating
any particular web page
using this AI tool,
so at a section having
the logo link image,
which takes generally to the home page
of this page of the website.
It is also coded using an H1
in all the pages,
which is again incorrect.
It shouldn't be an H1 in all pages.
H1 basically should be
what will describe the page content.
It will differ from page to page
on that website.
Similarly,
though it is not mentioned over here,
but I will say
we have also found certain areas
where there was
a big font size text used,
but it was also given a heading.
Again, that was not needed
and unnecessarily used.
That is also a challenge.
Another thing is about images.
This will always be bound
to be a topic of discussion
because images are always subjective.
We have found instances
about incomplete alternative text
and also inaccurate alternative text.
In incomplete, there was an image stating
about the daily specials of artisan bread
and different types of breads were there.
It spoke about a part of it,
but what are the types of breads
and the prices for that?
It's never mentioned
in the whole text.
In addition to this,
there was an image which is subjective.
It could be decorative or informative,
depending on the business needs,
but the art was given just as a bakery,
wherein visually it is just
a basket consisting
different types of breads.
Remember,
we spoke about informative links.
For such links,
as well as other links,
it was coded using an anchor tag,
but it was not having a keyboard support.
If I go back to that example again,
even in this code,
you'll see there's an anchor,
but there's no href provided for it.
Then that's an again accessibility issue
about missing keyboard support.
Also, if you have any questions,
obviously, you can drop in chat
and we'll try to respond
as we go through the session
and address those as fast as possible
as we could.
Now, since we have seen
the red zone and the green zone
when it comes to AI,
there is an in-between zone,
which we have termed it
as yellow zone,
wherein we want to highlight
that manual testing or a manual review
is needed to bridge the gap
between the accessibility
when it comes to AI.
A human review is a must,
even if you're using a tool
that will give you certain issues.
Even when the tool that we have released
or we have created,
that tool, which is called A11yInspect,
that will be a demo
later on towards the end.
Even in that particular tool,
I'll say we don't necessarily say
it is a 100% detection tool
for accessibility issues.
Any good accessibility professional
will always give me an advice that
AI won't detect 100% accessibility issues.
A human intervention is needed
because a lot of the success criterias
are subjective.
They are requiring a manual decision
that if it's an error or not,
because when it comes to manual
review - I mean - AI testing,
it only catches 30% to 40% of the issue.
That is also the threshold.
Even in this 30%, 40%,
you will need some validation
to be done manually
to ensure that is an issue or not.
Manual review will also help you
understand the context-related problems.
We also spoke about image,
wherein it could be decorative
or informative.
Apart from that,
the dynamic updating context
that definitely needs
a fully manual review.
You need to understand
what is the dynamic updates happening,
what are the areas or the places
where an accessibility
is a requirement,
so that it can be bridged
for accessibility challenges.
An example would be
a simple modal dialogue.
When a modal dialogue
is open or closed,
the focus management
needs to be appropriate.
Focus should go to the modal dialogue
when it's open,
it should stay within the dialogue.
When it's closed,
the focus should go back
to the triggering element.
All these things AI can't detect.
That needs to happen manually
if it's happening in the right manner.
I'll say it's a mixture of AI
and manual testing or manual review,
which will complete your evaluation.
I'm not talking this because I'm working
in an accessibility-oriented organization
where we are providing services,
when it comes to audit
and other things as well.
You need people with disabilities
involved in this evaluation.
Otherwise,
your evaluation will be incomplete.
The perspective that
the actual user will bring to the table
will be invaluable.
We have been doing that
since we went into
the accessibility space.
Since at the start,
we have always included people
with disabilities in our auditing.
Some of the benefits that a manual review
will help you is with checking
for keyboard navigation.
Be it the keyboard operability,
be it the focus indicator,
if it is rightly done
for the interactive elements,
if they have the sufficient contrast
or not,
and also if the focus
is managed appropriately or not,
be it the programmatic focus,
like when dynamic interactions
are happening,
or be it the logical reading order
or focus order,
which needs to be ideally
from left to right and top to bottom.
When it comes to images,
as I mentioned, the alt text,
definitely the AI
can help you with it,
but whatever the information
is given in the alt,
that has to be manually vetted
and understood
that if it is correct, you give it one.
That is done using manual review.
The heading structures, again,
it needs to be manually vetted
because, based on the context of the page,
the heading hierarchy will differ a lot,
and you need to be ensuring
that heading hierarchy is correct,
not just based on the size of the text,
but based on the content
that is used.
These were some of the points
about yellow zone, red zone,
or green zone when it comes to AI.
The further agenda of this session
will be continued by Janaki.
Janaki, over to you.
: Thank you, Fahad.
As now we know what are the things
that an AI can take care
in terms of accessibility,
and why there is a need
of manual testing
as well as performing
automated tools testing.
Let's understand the execution plan.
First, we would run an automated tool
on a webpage
to identify, to inspect,
or analyze the entire code
and identifying the issues
related to code.
The next step would be
to do a manual testing.
With the help of keyboard
as well as screen reader,
we would be navigating
the entire page to identify any issues
that was not identified by our tool
and the issues that are related
to more of human judgment.
Something that would be accessible
as per the standards,
but it won't be that readable enough
or that clear enough for a user.
To enhance the user experience,
manual testing
would cover all those areas.
For example, if an automated tool
has identified a bug of color
not meeting the requirement
of color contrast for a text,
we can adjust the color combination
in a way that it meets the requirement
as per the standard
as well as it ensures that
it is clearly readable enough
for every user in different modes,
in different backgrounds,
so that no one has
any difficulty understanding the text.
If we have multiple interactive elements,
such as link on a webpage,
the tool can definitely identify
if the link text is not clear enough,
it is weak, for example,
learn more, read more,
or maybe a repetitive product name.
A manual intervention is required here
to understand the text is clear enough.
It helps user understand its purpose,
even when they are reading
out of context.
A tool can definitely identify
if the heading structure
is not appropriate, for example,
after a heading level H2,
if the page has H4.
Tool will definitely identify
and let know that H3 was skipped.
At the same time,
while fixing it,
we have to understand
whether the text H4
would needs to be updated
to H3 or H2,
or in fact, it does not have to be
a heading at all.
Similar is the case
when we talk about images.
A tool can help understand
whether a particular element
has a textual description
or it does not have
a textual description at all,
but to identify, to judge whether
a particular image is a decorative
or whether it is informative.
If it is informative,
what kind of information is required
to be covered in the textual description
that will help user instead
of having unwanted information
to be part of the textual descriptions.
Finally, testing the entire page
with the help of keyboard
and screen reader is definitely required
to understand if a user
can complete the entire journey,
to understand if every interactive element
can be reachable, can be operable.
The focus indicator that appears
for interactive element is clearly visible
so that a user know
where their focus is.
If there is a dynamic content,
like something is updated,
whether it is announced clearly
so that user knows
what has happened on the page.
This is our plan, our execution steps
to ensure that
the product that we release is tested,
and it is also accessible
for all the users.
Let's see a demo
of an automated tools
to understand
how it can help us identify the issues.
For today, we are going to focus
on A11yInspect.
First, we have to install it
from webstore.
Once that is done, we will be able
to access the bookmarklets of A11yInspect
as well as we will be able
to run through our page.
A11y can be found
within the developer tools,
and we can then navigate
to A11yInspect tab.
Here I have already run this scan,
but let me do it again.
I'll just refresh this.
The first tab shows a dropdown
wherein we have multiple elements.
If we want to focus
on one certain element,
like a form, dialog or color,
we can select that,
or we can select A11yInspect
and click on test now.
It gives me an overview
that this particular webpage
that I have created with the help of AI
has 5 issue types and 9 issues,
and there are validate of 14 issue type
and 28 issues.
This also is displayed
in a form of WCAG conformance level.
Out of 9, 8 fail under level A
and 1 fail under level AA.
To view more detail of these issues,
we'll click on the fail tab.
It shows all the issues
along with its severity.
Here, let's focus on the blocker issue,
which has 3 issues.
This is about link fails
to receive keyboard focus.
The instances name are present,
as well as it shows
that it falls under WCAG 2.1.1
success criteria.
If I click on the ID of this instance,
the page will scroll to show
where it exactly is present,
as well as the code
of that particular instance.
This is coded with the help of anchor tab,
but there is no other attribute
that ensure that
it receives keyboard focus.
To take a screenshot of this instance
and to highlight this instance,
we can directly click
on the download element present here,
and it will save an image
in our download folders.
Now, let's try understand
what is validate.
Validate is something that
it has all the issue types
which requires manual written.
To take one example,
we have verified the image has
an accurate textual description.
There are 5 issues,
and the severity is major.
It shows all the image
that has alternate text
and what text is present
within the alternate text.
It says that all is working.
I have 3 images
with the same alternate text,
and there are couple of more image
with a lot of textual description.
If I click on it,
I understand it's a decorative image,
but the entire thing
that is visible on the image is
part of the textual description.
The next tab is of suggestion.
There is one suggestion
that says image content
multiple heading level,
and there are two h1s.
It's a best practice,
and it is showing me that
the page has h1
with the exact same text
that is spoken in it.
One of the h1s
is present on the header,
and the next h1
is present on the footer.
Now, this requires a manual review
to understand what kind of adjustment
needs to be done here.
The next one shows
the entire page structure
that is all the landmarks,
all the headings,
along with its text and its level.
I now know that the page
has footer, main, and header,
along with form,
but yes, there are multiple banners
that are coded,
so need to ensure
whether it is really required
or is it incorrect
and what kind of changes required there.
The next is color contrast tab,
wherein we can use the color picker
or we can give an input value
that is the HEX code or RGB color
of the foreground as well as background,
which then will give us
a contrast ratio
as well as will let us know
whether it meets the standard large text
or non-text by double A
as well as by triple A.
The next one is CSS overview tab.
This is something that is going to be
very helpful for a UX and UI person.
This tab shows
all the color combination used
that is all the color
foreground and background color,
the text size used on the entire web page,
the text family.
Then it shows you
what needs to be avoided,
what combination needs to be avoided
to meet standard
and large text requirement.
This is going to be very helpful
while designing this web page on
what we should not be doing
or what color combination
we should not pick.
The next one is a unit converter.
You can provide a unit and the size,
and then get it converted
to identify or to find
what is the size of that particular text
or a container in a different unit.
Few more controls
that we have at the top is
if we want to re-scan,
we can click on the "refresh" button.
If you want to export all the file names,
you can export it,
as well as there is another control
of pause script.
We have seen certain elements
that are coded with the help of scripts,
and to inspect the code of that
particular element becomes a challenge,
because the moment
we click somewhere to inspect
the particular element code,
the content gets collapsed
or it disappears from the page,
and it is highly impossible
to find the code of the element.
In such cases,
we can click on the pause script.
Instead of writing the script manually,
we can directly click on a button.
It writes the code for us,
and then we can manually check
the code of that particular element.
We can click on "resume" script execution,
such that we can again use
or interact with our website.
Apart from this,
we also have bookmarklets
present in A11yInspect.
Let's have a look at it.
Once we click on bookmarklet,
there are multiple options present,
and we can click multiple at a time
or maybe single
based on how it is required.
Let's click on list, as we know
we have a structure on the page,
and here we see it is provided accurately,
like UL and LI.
If we select table
and let's go to the table structure
and here it is.
I can see that our table
is coded with table,
tbody, tr, et cetera,
but there is no th element
for the table headers.
This helps identifying
or understanding the structure,
the code of an element.
This was all about the tool.
Let's proceed
with our conclusion of the day.
Using an AI, definitely,
it is going to boost the speed
of creating a website.
It will write the code,
it will structure the page.
It will also ensure that accessibility
is taken care to a certain amount,
but definitely, it does not guarantee
a complete accessibility.
That becomes a need
of testing a web page
with the help of tool
as well as manual review
such that all the code-related
or the user benefit issues
are identified and those are fixed.
Lastly, we have to keep in mind
that accessibility is not a checklist,
something that you do it once
and then you forget it completely.
It is something
that needs to be evolved
as we evolve our content,
we add certain thing on a web page
or whenever a text tag is updated,
depending on the user needs.
Accessibility needs to be reviewed
again and again.
We also have to make sure that
our product is accessible for everyone.
With that, thank you so much
for giving us this opportunity.
Here, we have a few details
on contacting us,
me and Fahad.
You can find this information.
Now we are open for our questions.
: All right,
thank you very much,
Janaki and Fahad
for that wonderful presentation.
Just a friendly reminder for everyone,
you can use the Q&A feature
here in Zoom webinars to submit questions
now that the talk has concluded,
or you could have submitted them any time.
We're going to answer as many questions
as we can in the next five minutes or so.
I am going to go ahead and dive right in.
I have a couple of my questions,
but I'm going to try to prioritize
audience questions first, so...
Let's see here.
All right.
You mentioned that you had to do
extra prompting to get the AI to observe
these accessibility best practices,
and even then, that didn't seem
to really be a guarantee
that you would get the desired result.
Can you share any thoughts or opinions
on how far away we are from everyday users
who maybe aren't accessibility specialists
being able to generate,
I'm using air quotes
for the listening audience,
"reasonably accessible sites"
on their own?
: Based on my experience,
while I was trying to build a site,
so even after giving
a detailed description on making sure
that the button is accessible
or making sure the color combinations
are sufficient enough
to meet certain requirements,
the AI definitely made sure
that it's somewhat there,
it's somewhat not there,
is what my opinion is.
I do understand, when it's a new user,
and we are not sure what to make sure
that how to get
an accessible output out of it,
yes, AI would not literally give you
those results,
just by saying that,
make sure the site is accessible.
We have to give a detailed response
or detailed prompt in that case,
maybe calling it out, make sure
that the button has descriptive name,
or the color combination
that are being used it will be meeting
the requirement as for certain standards.
For me, yes, it is not there up till now,
and it requires a detailed prompt.
: Fahad, anything to add?
Or can I move to the next question?
: Yes, I guess so.
I'll just add one thing.
Because, as I said,
when it comes to accessibility,
I'll say, yes,
even when we see developers coding
a website from there in itself,
and not necessarily using an AI,
I'll also say
they are not "reasonably accessible"
as well.
Because it all depends
on how knowledgeable you are
from the accessibility
requirements point of view.
Because even to give prompts,
you need certain accessibility,
like the knowledge.
At least the basic ones,
like the low-hanging fruit,
you can try to move out of the way
as I was mentioning in the talk as well.
Like with regards to color contrast,
that is an easy prompt.
Just give me some no contrast colors,
which are having an accessible ratios.
That is one of the easiest one.
Some of the things AI is taking care of,
with regards to basic labels and all.
I think so, those would be pretty good.
When it comes to more complex component,
I don't think so that AI
is still there yet,
because it requires a lot of engineering,
manual engineering from the developers
and experts.
: All right, wonderful.
Thank you both so much for those insights.
In the less than two minutes we have left,
I want to ask a question
that maybe you'll be able
to answer, which is,
if you could put
everyone working
on these AI building tools into one room
and tell them to change one thing,
and they had to do it,
what would you tell them?
: Go ahead, Janaki.
: The only thing would be
the AI should make sure
the code is correct.
For example, if AI is creating a button,
it should make sure that it has a role,
it receives focus,
it has a need,
it has a good color combination.
Making sure whatever element
it is creating,
it has basic accessibility
that it should meet.
Yes, Fahad.
: I know this
might be thinking out loud.
When it comes
to just one thing, I would say,
when we are trying to give
the prompts, maybe,
like nonsense,
this is all AI build,
and there would be definitely
machine learning involved behind this.
If those prompts
can yield maybe quick accessibility tips
as well
when you're trying
to build a button, maybe,
so maybe AI can just tell, okay,
ensure the button is having a label,
maybe the keyboard support,
or if you're trying to add an image, maybe
the AI can just give a prompt that okay,
ensure that you check the image is having
accurate alternate text or not.
Maybe some kind of that intuitive--
: I'm sorry, I have
to cut you off there,
because we have to give
our captioners a break.
Thank you very much for attending
this session with Fahad and Janaki.
You can continue
the conversation in the chat
or on social media
at #WPA11Y day and #WPAD2025.
We also appreciate it if you go
to 2025.wpaccessibility.day/feedback
to provide anonymous feedback
for our speakers on their presentation,
and you can enter to win
a t-shirt while you're there.
Stay tuned for advancing accessibility,
I almost said advancing AI,
advancing accessibility
through community
and open source with Samuel Osei,
which is starting at 1300 UTC.
While you're waiting,
don't forget to visit the sponsors page,
grab that virtual swag,
and enter for a chance to win
some other great prizes.
We will see you in the next session.